# useLayoutEffect: auto-scrolling textarea

## 📝 Your Notes

1. What's the difference between useEffect and useLayoutEffect? They behave very
   similarly, but 99% of the time you'll want to use useEffect.
2. When should you useLayoutEffect? If your side effect is mutating the DOM (via
   DOM node ref) and the DOM mutation will change the appearance of the DOM node
   between the time that it is rendered and your effect mutates it. If you
   useEffect in this situation, the user could see a flicker when your DOM
   mutations take effect.
3. What are the two ways to tell React to run side-effects after it renders?
   useEffect and useLayoutEffect
4. What's a simple rule for when do run either? If you are making ~observable
   changes to the DOM, useLayoutEffect, otherwise useEffect

## Background

There are two ways to tell React to run side-effects after it renders:

1. `useEffect`
2. `useLayoutEffect`

The difference about these is subtle (they have the exact same API), but
significant. 99% of the time `useEffect` is what you want, but sometimes
`useLayoutEffect` can improve your user experience.

To learn about the difference, read
[useEffect vs useLayoutEffect](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/useeffect-vs-uselayouteffect)

And check out the [hook flow diagram](https://github.com/donavon/hook-flow) as
well.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/exercise/04.js)
- [Final](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/04.js)

There's no exercise for this one because basically you just need to replace
`useEffect` with `useLayoutEffect` and you're good. So you pretty much just need
to experiment with things a bit.

Before you do that though, compare the finished example with the exercise.
Add/remove messages and you'll find that there's a janky experience with the
exercise version because we're using `useEffect` and there's a gap between the
time that the DOM is visually updated and our code runs.

Here's the simple rule for when you should use `useLayoutEffect`: If you are
making observable changes to the DOM, then it should happen in
`useLayoutEffect`, otherwise `useEffect`.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%94%A5&e=04%3A%20useLayoutEffect%3A%20auto-scrolling%20textarea&em=).
